United as one, divided by zero
I really like this picture because when I saw it I recognized it immediately.
When the matrix came out, I was just developing the ability to think
philosophically and I identified with Neo as probably everybody did, but I
didn't realize that 15 years later the dominent populist force would actually
be the archetype of the agent.

so who am i
Maybe the yongest of the old cypherpunks, I was just a little bit too young
to be a cypherpunk but just a little bit too old to be one of the Web Kids.

I was there during the first crypto war but it wasn't until later that I
understood the significance of what was going on.

I've developed an interest in software and infosec, investigating conspiracy
and corruption, law and magic and for me, magic is really just anything that's
both *credible* and causes problems for the theories we call physics.

What's interesting is it doesn't matter much which direction you start from,
you can start by looking at how to break software or reading over Stanley Meyer's
patents or how the NSA collects information or trying to figure what really
happened on nine eleven, wherever you start, it's the same rabbit hole.

You start out thinking you're going to get to the bottom of this but as you
encounter more and more information which is both compelling and contradictory,
it creates an increasing cognitive dissodance which if you follow through then
you have to admit that you really can't be sure of ... anything. And by can't
be sure I mean you really don't know. And that leaves you at the bottom right
and you have to be careful when you're in polite conversation not to say
something like "there is a .1% chance this laptop has clandestine malware and
a 99% chance that it has hardware level backdoors which are accessable to anyone
on the internet." because that kind of thing just makes people uncomfortable.

Now that I've given you a rough picture of the last 10 years of my life, lets
continue the topic.

Welcome to the cypherdrome
basically the crypto-war has been won, whether we have any hand in actually
winning it is debatable, I think Richard Stallman should get the most credit
but at any rate, the stuff of fiction in the 80's an 90's is real.
You can become completely anonymous on the net, and yes there's a little splat
there because every time someone really manages to piss off the FBI, they end
up in jail. The story is always that the technology is sound, blah blah blah
but anyway until like silkroad 2 or 3 or whatever manages to stay up for a
significant amount of time, for me that little astricks is going to stay.
But it's not a big deal, unless you're the biggest fish in the pond, you are
anonymous.
Anonymous money and anonymous markets, it's pretty wild what we're experiencing
right now, for the first time you can actually get good quality drugs without
having deep connections. There are supposedly weapons, there are notibly not
really any serious assasination markets but that's not because of lack of
technology, it's a human issue that people have so far rejected them.
Anonymity is Freedom


But it's also isolation. The picture of the tanks seemed fitting because you
can't see anyone around you, when you're anonymous you really have no social
network, certainly nobody who is going to rush to your defense because they
need to protect their own asses, and if the NSA can see what you're doing,
the tank is transparent which is really the worst possible situation.
In the words of the late Dr Thompson, In a closed society where everyone's
guilty, the only crime is getting caught.
The FBI has the cheat codes, they get infinite tries and all weapons, and you
have one life.
This scenario lends itself to a totally centralized world where everyone is
managed individually through blackmail and everybody thinks they're the only
one.

But when you look back at what this technology was built for, it was built
for the Neuromancer, the Neo, the individual Cowboy resisting an overwelming
totalitarian government and what is striking is just how insignificant that
archetype has proven to be.

The archetype which ended up having significance is the mask, the ghost of
Guy Fawkes, and when you put on the mask, the fact that the NSA may know who
you are ceases to be relevant because who you are ceases to be relevant.
The mask is really an excellent brand under which to do activism because
there will never be an honest headline reading "FBI arrests Anonymous". They
can go after you but it does them very little good because as soon as you are
arrested you go back to being who you were before you dawned the mask and guy
fawkes slips away.

To recap the technologies which were mostly developed by the cypherpunk
community are what I'll call 'first wave' technologies.

Privacy was highly valued, anonymity, p2p technologies which allow anyone
to connect and become part of the system. This generally implies a lot of
trust. We've developed some pretty amazing solutions for reducing trust but
in these systems we end up trusting everyone equally. This by the way is
highly vulnerable to infiltration, which has been one of the most common
ways that the US Government has shut down organizations which it didn't like.
It's always the same story, you send a few infiltrators who identify the
leaders, convince them to do something stupid and arrest them. Or you spread
lies and disinformation causing drama amongst the members of the group. It's
been done over and over again and 20th century activist organizations had
just no effective defense against this.

The second wave, as I call it, is what gave rise to Guy Fawkes. In the second
wave we don't keep secrets so hirearchy is emergent and temporary. Going after
the leaders has little effect.

We're seeing technologies taken from the first wave to reduce trust but at
the same time social networks are used for trust so suddenly it's a tiny bit
harder to attack than just showing up like "Hi I'm tom, I'm not a fed". We
should not assume that the second wave has no vulnerabilities but it seems to
be resilient against the really stupid obvious ones. Take for instance
wikileaks, at one point the US government really had it out for that
organization. They managed to get Assange into relative isolation
(he can't troll at press conferences anymore) but the wikileaks institution is
still fairly stable, and that's something which nobody could have imagined 30
years ago.

Looking back at what turns out to be effective we can start to judge the merit
of various technologies and we have managed to develop a whole lot of irrelivant
technology. Some people are going to come away from this and decide that it just
doesn't matter, an anonymity network is important even if they're the only one
using it. Masturbation is fun, that's a defining characteristic. But if we want
to develop technology which has a real impact on society, we're going to need to
look at the success and failure cases in the past 20 years, or even the past
2000 years.
It's pretty clear that sharing is where the real power comes from.
If you look at bitcoin, it's not using cryptography to keep secrets, it's
just protecting a common resource, the blockchain.
The policy of trusting nobody is falling through, in Gnutella there was a
completely decentralized network but Gnutella lost the standards war to
Bittorrent which formed communities around the various trackers, and even after
the actual tracker technology ceased to be relevant the tribalism around sites
like thepiratebay and eztv remained.
It seems that among the winners in the past decade, the security model has had a
heavy dose of "You Aint Gonna Need It". Scope creep can kill a project.
In security, scope creep turns into debilitating paranoia which is something we
really don't need at this moment in history.

This is probably going to be a contravercial slide.
Look, we are living in Interesting Fucking Times. The whole concept of the NSA,
what makes it so attractive to the US government and what makes it so terrifying
to people in this room, is rooted in how the world worked 40 years ago, you know
when nation-states were relevant.
I feel like the NSA is really the human face on this machine which we've created,
which we've embedded ourselves inside of, and which is systematically destroying
all secrecy, privacy and privileged information.

And this brings me to my conclusion. When I started this lecture, I knew I wanted
to say something contrasting Cypherpunks and Anonymous, I wanted to talk about
the power of groups and collaborative decent. I had no idea I would end up here.
I wanted to talk about a zero-knowledge collaborative editor which I developed,
but at this point I can't convince myself of it's relevance.

The image of a jet turbine is apropos for ending this lecture because this is
what we are living in today. The same sorts of things which are happening now
have always been happened but the sheer force and speed of it is something we
have no historical narrative to compare to. A slightly flawed system is like a
slightly flawed engine, it's fine until you hit the race track. Today, political
and economic systems which have worked okay for centuries are ripping themselves
to pieces in a matter of a few years.
Building technology to undermine institutions we don't like is really worthless
right now, mission accomplished and now it's eating everything in sight.
Something we're not very good at is imagining the infrastructure of the world we
would really like to live in, not just the parties and free love and shit but the
actual energy, economics and logistics networks which will back that. This is
something we're going to have to learn really fucking fast, because as you well
know, this thing *can* be programmed, and the distinction between a great global
awakening and nuking ourselves off the planet is going to be made by how well
we can fucking code.



